PEDIATRIC USE
Until further experience is gained in patients younger than 18 years, administration of Bupivacaine Spinal in
this age group is not recommended.
ADVERSE REACTIONS
Reactions to bupivacaine are characteristic of those associated with other amide type local anaesthetics
The most commonly encountered acute of those adverse experiences which demand immediate
countermeasures following the administration of spinal anaesthesia are hypertension due to loss of sympathetic
tone and respiratory paralysis or underventilation due to cephalad extension of the motor level of
anaesthesia. These may lead to cardiac arrest if untreated. In addition, dose related convulsions and
cardiovascular collapse may result from diminished tolerance, rapid absorption from the injection site or from
unintentional intravascular injection of a local anaesthetic solution Factors influencing plasma protein binding,
such as acidosis, systemic disease which alter protein production, or competition of other drugs for protein
binding sites, may diminish individual tolerance.
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Respiratory paralysis or underventilation may be noted as a result of upward extension of the level of spinal
anaesthesia and may lead to secondary hypoxic cardiac arrest if untreated. Preanaesthetic medication, intraoperative
analgesics and sedatives, as well as surgical manipulation, may contribute to underventilation. This
will usually be noted within minutes of the injection of spinal anaesthetic solution, but because of differing
surgical maximal onset times, differing intercurrent drug usage and differing manipulation, it may occur any
time during surgery or the immediate recovery period.
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
Hypotension due to loss of sympathetic tone is a commonly encountered extension of the clinical pharmacology
of spinal anaesthesia. This is more commonly observed in patients with decreased blood volume,
decreased interstitial fluid volume, cephalad spread of the local anaesthetic, and / or mechanical obstruction of
venous return. Nausea and vomiting are frequently associated with hypotensive episodes following the
administration of spinal anaesthesia. High doses, or inadvertent intravascular injection, may lead to high
plasma levels and related depression of the myocardium, decreased cardiac output, bradycardia, heart block,
ventricular arrhythmias, and possibly, cardiac arrest. (See WARNINGS PRECAUTIONS and
OVERDOSAGE section)
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Respiratory paralysis or underventilation secondary to cephalad spread of the level of spinal anaesthesia (See
Respiratory System) and hypotension for the same reason (see Cardiovascular System) are the two most
common encountered central nervous system related adverse observations which demand immediate
countermeasures.
High dose or inadvertent intravascular injection may leads to high plasma levels and related central nervous
system toxicity characterized by excitement and/or depression. Restlessness, anxiety, dizziness, tinnitus,
blurred vision or tremors may occur, possibly proceeding to convulsions. However, excitement may be
transient or absent, with depression being the first manifestation of an adverse reaction. This may quickly be
followed by drowsiness merging into unconsciousness and respiratory arrest.
NEUROLOGIC
The incidence of adverse neurologic reactions associated with the use of local anaesthetics may be related to
the total dose of local anaesthetic administered and are also dependent upon the particular drug used, the
route of administration and the physical status of the patient. Many of these effects may be related to local
anaesthetic techniques, with or without contribution from the drug.
Neurologic effects following spinal anaesthesia may include loss of perineal sensation and sexual function,
persistent anaesthesia, paresthesia weakness and paralysis of the lower extremities and loss of sphincter
control all of which may have slow, incomplete or no recovery, hypotension, high or total spinal block, urinary
retention, headache, backache, septic meningitis, meningismus, arachnoiditis, slowing of labor, increased
incidence of forceps delivery, shivering, cranial nerve palsies due to traction of nerves from loss of
cerebrospinal fluid and feacal and urinary incontinence.
Allergic : Allergic-type reactions are rare and may occur as a result of sensitivity to the local anaesthetic These
reactions are characterized by signs as urticaria, pruritus, erythema, angioneurotic edema (including laryngeal
edema) tachycardia, sneezing, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, syncope, sweating, elevated temperature and
possibly, anaphylactoid like symptomatology (including severe hypotension). Cross sensitivity among
members of the amide type local anaesthetic group has been reported. The usefulness of screening to
sensitivity has not been definitely established.
Other: Nausea and vomiting may occur during spinal anaesthesia.
OVERDOSAGE
Acute emergencies from local anaesthetics are generally related to high plasma levels encountered during
therapeutic use to underventilation (and perhaps apnea) secondary to upward extension of spinal anaesthesia.
Hypotension is commonly encountered during the conduct of spinal anaesthesia due to relaxation of
sympathetic tone, and sometimes contributory mechanical obstruction of venous return.
MANAGEMENT OF LOCAL ANAESTHETIC EMERGENCIES
The first consideration is prevention, best accomplished by careful and constant monitoring of cardiovascular
and respiratory vital signs and the patient's state of consciousness after each local anaesthetic injection. At the
first sign of change oxygen should be administered.
The first step in the management of systemic toxic reactions, as well as underventilation due to a high or total
spinal consists of immediate attention of the establishment and maintenance of patient airway and effective
assisted or controlled ventilation with 100% oxygen with a delivery system capable of permitting immediate
positive airway pressure.
Hypotension due to sympathetic relaxation may be managed by giving intravenous fluids (such as sodium
chloride injection 09% or Lactated Ringer's Injection), in an attempt to relieve mechanical obstruction of
venous return, or by using vasopressors (such as ephedrine which increases the force of myocardial
contractions) and, if indicated, by giving plasma expanders or whole blood.
Recent clinical data from patients experiencing local anaesthetic induced convulsions demonstrated rapid
development of hypoxia, hypercarbia, and acidosis with bupivacaine within a minute of the onset of
convulsions. These observations suggest that oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production are greatly
increased during local anaesthetic convulsions and emphasize the importance of immediate and effective
ventilation with oxygen which may avoid cardiac arrest.
If not treated immediately, convulsions with simultaneous hypoxia, hypercarbia and acidosis plus myocardial
depression from the direct effects of the local anaesthetic may result in cardiac arrhythmias, bradycardia,
asystole, ventricular fibrillation, or cardiac arrest. Respiratory abnormalities, including ap-nea. may occur.
Underventilation or apnea due to a high or total spinal may produce these same signs and also lead to cardiac
arrest if ventilatory support is not instituted. If cardiac arrest should occur, standard cardiopulmonary
resuscitative measures should be instituted and maintained for a prolonged period if necessary.
Convulsions may be controlled, if necessary, with drugs such as succinylcholine. diazepam or thiopental
Hypotension may be managed by giving intravenous fluids.
The supine position is dangerous in pregnant women at term because of aortocaval compression by the gravid
uterus. Therefore during treatment of systemic toxicity, maternal hypotension or fetal bradycardia following
regional block, the parturient should be maintained in the left lateral decubitus position il possible, or manual
displacement of the uterus off the great vessels be accomplished.
The mean seizure dosage of bupivacaine in rhesus monkeys was found to be 4.4 mg/kg with mean arterial
plasma concentration of 4.5 meg/ml. The intravenous and subcutanadus LD in mice is 6 mg/ kg to 8 mg/kg 50
and 38 mg/kg to 54 mg/kg, respectively.
DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
The dose of ABOCAIN SPINAL (Bupivacaine in dextrose Injection,) varies with the anaesthetic procedure,
the area to be anaesthetized, the vascularity of the tissues, the number of neuronal segments to be blocked,
the depth of anaesthesia and degree of muscle relaxation required, the duration of anaesthesia desired,
individual tolerance, and the physical condition of the patient The smallest dose and concentration required to
produce the desired result should be administered. Dosages of Abocain Spinal (Bupivacaine in Dextrose
Injection) should be reduced for elderly and debilitated patients and patients with cardiac and/or liver disease.
For specific techniques and procedures, refer to standard textbooks.
In the average adult, seven and one half mg (7.5 mg or 1.0 ml) Abocain Spinal has generally proven satisfactory
for spinal anaesthesia for lower extremity and perineal procedures including TURP and vaginal hysterectomy. v
Twelve mg (12 mg or 1.6 ml) has been used for lower abdominal procedures such as abdominal hysterectomy,
tubal ligation, and appendectomy.
Because experience with Bupivacine Spinal is limited in patients below the age 18 years, dosage
recommendations in this age group cannot be made.
OBSTETRICAL USE
Doses as low as 6 mg bupivacaine hydrochloride have been used for vaginal delivery under spinal anaesthesia.
The dose range of 7.5 mg to 10.5 mg (1 ml to 1.4 ml) bupivacaine hydrochloride has been used forcaesarean
section under spinal anaesthesia.
Abocain Spinal should be inspected visually for discolouration and particulate matter prior to administration:
solutions which are discoloured or which contain particulate matter should not be administered.
Unused portion of solutions should be discarded following initial use.
Bupivacaine Spinal may be autoclaved once at 15 pounds pressure, 121° C (250°F) for 15 minutes. However do
not administer any solution which is discoloured or contains paniculate matter
